Find a job ranch or farm managing that I could afford to take.
So instead, I opted for a job with the Extension Service as the assistant county agent in Palestine, Texas, with W.T.
LaRue, a longtime county agent and a wonderful fellow.
And I got two and a half years of excellent training there.
and I got to know the local veterinarian named Bill Stevens became a close friend of mine and I'd start going on large animal calls out in the country with him and one day in June, hot day, he asked if I'd like to go on a calf delivery with him and I said sure and he came by the county courthouse picked me up and
drove down the street and said, I've got to stop at the hardware store, go in.
He had a brand new car with air conditioning.
Wow.
This was in 1958.
58, no it was in 1959.
And when he got out he said, you want to come in?
I said, no just leave the motor running.
I sat there in that nice cool air conditioning and I just got to thinking right then.
I said, what would it take for me to become a veterinarian?
And when he came back, I asked him.
And he said, well, I don't know, but you can call Dr. McMurray down at A&M and he'll sure tell you.
He's the associate dean for academic program.
Brother, I did.
I called him the next day.
And he said, well, it'll take you at least five more years.
And he told me why.
And the curriculum in veterinary medicine is four, plus I had some prerequisites that I'd have to get.
But he did say, maybe we can pare it down to nine semesters, four and a half years.
I don't know.
We have to come down here and go over here.
coursework before I can tell you.
I went home and told my wife, I said, I've been talking to the vet school about the possibility of going back to school and getting a degree and becoming a veterinarian.
What do you think about that?
And her response was one sentence, no way.
No.
Well, I came down to College Station in Bishop with Dr. McMurray, and he figured that I could get by with four and a half years.
And I went back and told her, instead of five years, it's just four and a half.
No way.
We got three children.
She was working, and I was making $4,600 a year.
Getting by, but that's all, just getting by.
She worked as a receptionist for two physicians in their office.
And lo and behold, in about three days, she came home from work one day and said, I've changed my mind.
I said, why?
She says, the two doctors talked me into it.
Said, that's what you ought to do.
Well, wonderful.
So, man, come January I'm enrolled in A&M, taking these makeup courses, physics, biochemistry.
Was it January of 60?
January of 60.
Man, you talk about tough.
I had to go by
Elementary chemistry book, elementary math book, and start from scratch so that I could pass these courses I'm taking.
They told me that if I made decent grades, I would probably be accepted to vet school.
But you have to apply and you go through the whole process.
Anyway, to make a long story short, I work day and night.
20 hours a day, every day, seven days a week.
I was going to get into vet school and I did.
Now where did y'all live?
We moved to
Park Place, do you know where the corner of Park Place and Wellborn is?
Second house on the south side of the road, a little two by four, $30 a month.
Roach nest.
We finally got rid of all of them.
But they changed the curriculum while I was in school and went to a trimester system.
And I finished in an even four years.
All right.
So you did get admitted.
How did you learn that you had been admitted?
How did you get that word?
By letter.
Oh, by letter.
Okay.
What were your feelings when you opened the letter and saw the contents?
Well, just like when I got my degree, I was on cloud nine.
And had anybody given you a tip in advance?
Had you gotten a hint?
of whether it would be yes or no before you go?
Oh, no.
Not at all.
So you started then in the fall of 60.
Mm-hmm.
How were the, the class then had what, 60?
Sixty, 64 students.
All male.
All white.
And were you all brought together for an opening welcome or anything?
Oh, yes.
Describe that.
Dean Price, Al Price, they spent, he spent an hour and a half or more with us and then after he, many others came in and spoke to us, it was an awful lot and a very busy day.
Now I have heard through word of mouth, never heard anybody record it, that one of the things he mentioned in those opening speeches was how to pronounce the word veterinarian.
Oh yes.
Was that part of it?
Oh, yes.
And not only him, but if you didn't pronounce it correctly after that, you got a lecture from several others as well.
Dr. Pappy Burns and on down the line.
There were a lot of good people over there.
Dr. Turk, all of them long since gone.
Describe the beginning in vet school and the curriculum and the routine and so forth.
Well, as you may know, vet school is
essentially eight semesters of about 20 or more hours per semester.
You have to be totally dedicated.
or you don't last very long.
I've always said you don't have to necessarily be smart.
You just have to be hard working and persistent and stay with it and spend all of your time studying.
I set myself some goals.
I said I'm going to not make any C's.
I'm going to make all A's and B's and I want to make a 3.5 GPA.
Actually at that point in time it would have been 2.5.
And I don't necessarily want to be the best in the class, but I want to be in the top group in my class.
And I knew I had to work.
I had three jobs, two of them in the vet school.
Well, one of them in the vet school, one of them in the entomology lab next door on Agronomy Road.
And then my sophomore year, I got the veteran's job.
in the USDA building as janitor.
That was the big job, $1.91 an hour.
My other jobs paid 75 cents an hour.
So your income, the family income at that point was about what?
My wife began working.
She wound up in the 4-H program on campus.
Family income at that point in time probably somewhere between $300 and $350 a month.
Was there anything that first year that was done to get you married students together, those of you that had spouses and children?
Was there any socializing for the students?
Yes.
Mostly in the form of parties where everybody would go and we became a very close-knit group of people to this day.
Who hosted the parties or sponsored them?
Did the vet school?
Vet school principally, yes.
Describe Al Price as a dean, as a person.
Al Price was...
a good man.
I do have some criticisms of him.
He was a good dean, very organized, have to be, to be an administrator.
You know, he's military-like in his precision of doing things.
He's fair.
The one thing that I criticized Dr. Price for, and I did it to his face,
That's the only way I'll tell somebody that I don't like what they had done.
My senior year, I was a class officer, and we called one of our classmates in for cheating.
We began to get suspicious early on that he was cheating and couldn't believe it, and so we
I started documenting it, date times and what he did.
Not just one of us, but nine of us documented, no question about it.
We had a classmate that was cheating.
And we called him into a meeting after school one day and put it to him, and he denied it for a long time.
But after about an hour, he broke down and said, you know, it was obvious that we were right.
And he didn't know why he did it.
He didn't have to do it.
He just did it.
And he's probably right.
He probably is a smart guy.
And we said, we're taking you to Dr. Price.
We don't want you as a classmate.
We don't believe in this kind of behavior.
And we want him to kick you out of school.
And we set up a meeting with Dr. Price the next day and took him in there and sat down at a big table there together and went through all of the details of it and said, I was a spokesman.
I said, Dr. Price, we don't want this kind of behavior in our group and we don't want this fellow in our class.
We hope that you will kick him out of school.
That's our recommendation to you.
He's documented nine times and he has admitted it.
He did it.
And we said, we believe his behavior will be this way forever.
Please get him out of our midst.
And the long story short is that Dr. Price wouldn't do it.
He didn't tell us.
He just never did do it.
And the guy graduated with us.
And I want to tell you one little follow-up on it.
I followed everything he's ever done, or more or less.
I can tell you right where he is today.
He's a nice guy.
Outwardly you think, you know, he's wonderful, but there's something not right about, while Dr. Price was
the head of the biomedical science program.
He was a dean for 15 years and then he went over to biomedical science and stayed like forever.
He was over there until past 70.
And I got my
from the Texas Veterinary Medical Association listing licensed veterinarians in Texas, and it showed the people that were appointed to the Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners.
And guess whose name was on there?
Oh, my, my.
Big as Dallas.
I nearly had a heart attack.
I'm gonna blame you.
My, my.
This guy policing our profession?
Anyway, three of us got together and wrote him a letter and said, we expect you to resign your position, period.
And he did.
But maybe I was ugly.
I went over one day to Dr. Price's office and I said, Dr. Price, have you
looked at the latest slate of veterinary medical board examiners.
No sir, what do you mean?
And I handed it to him and showed him and pointed.
I said, do you remember him?
And then I began to feel sorry that I had gone in because it really hurt him and he wouldn't even say anything else.
I just walked out and I regretted that I ever did that.
Now, the nickname was Slick Owl.
Slick Owl.
And that did not mean, it meant that he was polished and his hair was well combed.
Yeah.
It didn't mean that he was doing a slick deal.
Oh, no.
No, sir, it was due to just what you described.
He had a bald spot back here and he always kept that hair straight back, not one of them out of place.
All right.
For a beginning veterinary student, do you remember some classes that were particularly memorable?
important, memorable as you're beginning vet school?
Particularly memorable classes in vet school.
And or teachers thereof may not be able to separate the class from the teacher.
Okay, now you got me.
Absolutely.
There's some wonderful people over there and have been historically ever since.
Dr. Francis.
And you know John Milliff, I'm sure.
John Milliff, now there was a role model for you.
A fellow that had a wonderful head on his shoulders, had a great education.
He loved young people.
He loved to teach.
He was an artist par excellence.
And he taught.
with colored crayons in his hand drawing all of this stuff and made it just real as you could not imagine on that blackboard.
He was a wonderful teacher.
Dr. John, everybody loved Dr. John.
Who else?
Oh my goodness, Dr. Turk.
What was his nickname, R.D.
Turk?
Dick.
What was his nickname?
Yeah.
Well everybody called him Dick Turk but we didn't give him any nicknames.
Man, this fellow had a worldwide reputation.
He was parasitologist number one in the world, as far as we were concerned, and did he ever know it and was he a good teacher?
Yes, sir, he was.
With his sidekick, Rural Bell, Rural was a good fellow, but he wasn't a Dr. Turk, but he's a good man.
Both of them long since gone, but Dr. Turk, I'll have to tell a story on him.
That's believable.
Doggone, your old hide, your honorary hide, Dr. Turk.
He's dead and gone.
He's a good man.
He loved to give pop quizzes, and that's wonderful.
I believe in them.
As a teacher, I gave them.
I'll never forget Dr. Kimler, Arden Kimler, came in one day, get a piece of paper up, describe everything you know,
about the... Can't think of the name of the ligament in a cow that holds a cow's head up.
I'll think of it in a minute.
And boy, you talk about catching a class full not knowing.
I think everybody in the class flunked that pop quiz.
Well, the class met three days a week.
It was anatomy, cow anatomy.
The day after tomorrow, when we walked in, he said, everybody get out a sheet of paper and describe everything you know about the... Same quiz.
Same quiz.
The only time anybody ever did that, but...
Thank goodness I was curious enough.
I went home and looked that sucker up and I got it cold, but there was a lot of long faces in there that second time.
But anyway, Dr. Turk gave us a pop quiz one day and then two days later came in and handed out the papers.
He always graded them promptly.
And whenever paper was handed out,
It just seemed like off the cuff, he said, Hall, he didn't know me from Adam, how come you and, and he named another student in my class, papers had similar answers.
And that's all he said, and then he started lecturing.
My Lord, I couldn't take notes during class.
I'd never been so shocked in my life.
And boy, when he said class is dismissed, I jumped up and he jumped up and he was gone and I was on his heels.
Walking down, he wouldn't even stop.
I said, Dr. Turk, stop, I want to talk to you.
I don't need to talk to you.
I said,
You need to listen to this."
And he just kept walking.
Well, anyway, I went immediately and caught this other fellow, and I said, let's sit down here and look at these papers and see what he's talking about.
And it was ten questions on the quiz, and about four of them, our answers were similar, with one question even having one phrase that was just the same.
But the thing about it was we had assigned seats and I sat on the front and he sat over here in the back.
Ah, okay.
Well, did he ever?
I thought that he was never.
My admiration of him was waning terribly.
That was a sophomore parasitology course.
When I was a senior, one day he called me in and he said, you know, I've made you wait long enough.
You've proved to me without a doubt that you don't cheat.
Neither one of you do.
And I made a mistake and I'm sorry.
And I said, that's fine, Dr. Turk.
I said, you sure did wait a long time.
but it didn't tarnish.
So it was not intended to be a joke.
It wasn't any joke.
He was dead serious.
You can lay the papers there and look at them and there are some similarities in about four of the ten questions.
How come you all have the same answers?
You see, the day that I got this teaching award, and then in those days in Guyon Hall,
And you remember in those days, you didn't even know you'd been nominated, let alone that you'd won.
Yes, sir.
I know.
Okay.
He gets won immediately after I do.
And as he comes by, the microphone is turned on as he walks by the live mic.
And Mr. Rudder is getting ready to read the net, you know, and shaking.
Do you know what he said?
No telling.
Well, Earl, you must have been pretty damn hard up to find somebody to give one of these, if you had given one of these to me.
Of course, the audience laughs and laughs and laughs.
As you look back, were there any courses in the first year or so that were really critical to the development of a capable veterinarian?
Were there some courses that were more significant in content than others?
Dr. Monroe, I'm going to say that I looked at every one of them like it was critical.
I didn't see one of the courses that seemed to have any more married or less married than any other, honestly.
But now looking back.
Looking back, the same thing.
The only thing when I look back on my veterinary curriculum that bothered me then and still bothers me today but it has been rectified, they were woefully short
and behind the times in teaching pharmacology when I went through school.
Was that common nationally or was A&M a little on the surface?
I don't think it was universal, no.
I think we were behind the times, especially in the area of antibiotics.
Boy, woefully lacking.
What about go to the positive side?
In the strengths, what were?
Strengths, oh my goodness.
The strengths are across the board.
Okay.
The teachers were outstanding.
The coursework was great.
They taught us really well.
I was very pleased with my veterinary curriculum.
Now you, and when did the trimester begin?
It began in the summer of 1963.
We went all summer long in 63 and that was the beginning of the trimester system which only lasted a short time because that was foolishness.
So you didn't go all four years?
Oh no.
It would have killed me.
Because the trimester ended up being terminated pretty quickly, wasn't it?
Very quickly because
You can just tolerate so much abuse.
My goodness, you got to have a break once in a while.
Which courses were the most time-consuming?
Do you remember any of it?
The anatomy courses were so time-consuming and I've been critical and made polite suggestions to people in the anatomy department.
They teach so much detail that I felt was not necessary.
But still, they teach it.
You know, it's their course and they want to teach it the way they want.
And every little bump and every little crevice and every little knob has got to have two or three names.
And it makes it such a bulky volume of material for you to handle in a short period of time.
And how did you come to decide upon your special area?
When I came back to work as a faculty member in 1967, there were no specialists anywhere in the whole world of veterinary medicine.
Everybody was a generalist.
But with the advancement of knowledge and technology and et cetera, it became imperative that
each person narrow his scope of learning because it's impossible for you to know everything.
So you have to become extremely knowledgeable in a specialty area and let somebody else handle the rest of it.
Well, when they started this at A&M in the 70s, I told them that I was interested in cardiology, study of the heart,
But we had a faculty member that had one year seniority on me from Purdue, and he also was interested in cardiology.
And we were sitting around the table talking about how we were going to do this.
We would be allowed to have a certain amount of time a week to take coursework and to go to meetings and self-train yourself to become a specialist.
And so when he,
opted for cardiology.
There was only one other area of expertise left, and that was the nervous system.
And everybody hated the nervous system.
But being a hard head, I said, I'll take it.
And so that's the way I got into neurology, and I started self-teaching myself.
And that was in the Department of?
At that time,
The clinical sciences were under one department with Dr. Callaham, the head of the Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, with the small animal section and the large animal section.
All right, now you, all right, before you came back as a faculty member, you were a large or small animal?
general practice, all species.
My love was in large animals.
I was raised on the farm and that's where my interest was.
But in three and a half years of practice, along with my football injuries, I was getting banged up pretty bad with wild Brahma cows in East Texas and horses kicking and yanking.
And I said, my career is not going to be very long at the rate I'm going.
And maybe I better
look at small animal medicine.
So when I came back, I applied.
I had been offered a job through the years to come back and I just one day had a bad day and I called Ned Elliott and I said, is that job still open?
He said, yeah.
And I said, when can I go to work?
This was on a Saturday.
He said Monday.
I said, well, you're going to have to give me a week to move, Ned.
And I came back on March of 6, 1967.
All right.
Let's jump back to student days again.
You never, as an undergraduate or as a veterinary student, you never thought about dropping out.
You never questioned whether you were headed in the right direction intellectually.
Of those all your fellow beginning vet students, about how many of those graduated on time or the next year?
Sixty-four of us started in 1960 and 55 of us graduated in 1964.
So eight or nine, did they flunk out or some just drop out?
I don't remember.
any that dropped out.
I'm sure that they all flunked out.
And generalize about them.
Basically, where were they from, country or city, middle class, working class, well-to-do, farms, ranches, what?
I would say that I wouldn't want to characterize them as a group
saying they were the affluent or that they were less responsible or whatever.
In 1960, all of those people were
focused, I think.
At least they thought they were.
Most of them were older, like me.
I was 26.
We had very few real young kids in our class.
Oh, you're saying very few who went straight from undergraduate?
Right.
Very few.
I didn't know that.
Yes.
The reasons that they
failed, obviously, or multiple.
There were some that were in over their head and couldn't handle it.
They didn't fit a pattern of background or phenotype or anything else, to my knowledge.
They stumbled.
But now, of those in general, the vet student body, were they country?